Add spec for Print.md (#2550)
MicrosoftEdge/WebView2Feedback: specs/Print.md

Print API
===

# Background

> Developers have requested the ability to programmatically print the current page using a print dialog, print without a print dialog in WebView2. Currently end user can open a print preview dialog by pressing "Ctrl+ P" or selecting "Print" from context menu in a document and to open system print dialog requires pressing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers have requested the ability to programmatically print the current page optionally using a print dialog in WebView2. Currently the end user can open a print preview dialog by pressing "Ctrl+ P" or selecting "Print" from the context menu in a document or can open the system print dialog by pressing 
```

> "Ctrl + Shift + P" or clicking "Print using system dialog" link in print preview dialog. This API gives developers the ability to open print dialog without requiring the end user interaction and also can print without a dialog to a specific printer by configuring the print settings. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Ctrl + Shift + P" or clicking the "Print using system dialog" link in the print preview dialog. This API gives developers the ability to open the print dialog without requiring the end user interaction and also can print without a dialog to a specific printer by configuring the print settings. 
```

> 

Reviewer: Would be good to mention the existing CoreWebView2.PrintToPdf and why its not good enough (prints to a file which isn't allowed for some customers like banks, and no print dialog which is hard to remedy in a cross-platform manner on their own)

In this document we describe the updated API. We'd appreciate your feedback.

# Description
We propose following API's 

**Print API**: This API gives developers the ability to open a browser print preview dialog or system print dialog without requiring the end user interaction. This API consists of a Print method and can either open a browser print preview dialog or system print dialog based on COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND value.

**Print without a print dialog**: This API gives developers the ability to print the current page without a print dialog to the specific printer. This API consists of an asynchronous PrintWithSettings method and a PrintSettings2 object. 
PrintSettings2 object extends PrintSettings to support printing to a printer.

**Print to PDF Stream**: This API gives developers printable PDF data, which can be used as a preview in a custom print preview dialog. This API consists of an asynchronous PrintToPdfStream method and a PrintSettings2 object. 

# Examples
## Print

> You can use `Print` method to programmatically open a print dialog without end user interaction. Currently devs are using Javascript window.print() using WebView2 ExecuteScriptAsync api to invoke

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the `Print` method to programmatically open a print dialog without end user interaction. Currently devs are using JavaScript `window.print()` using the `CoreWebView2.ExecuteScriptAsync` API to invoke the
```

> browser print preview dialog and there isn't a way to invoke open system print dialog programmatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
browser print preview dialog. But there isn't a way to invoke open the system print dialog programmatically nor will `window.print()` work if script is disabled on the page, or the document is a PDF or other non-HTML document.
```

// This example shows the user a print dialog. If `printDialogKind` is COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND_BROWSER_PRINT_PREVIEW, opens a browser print preview dialog, otherwise opens a system print dialog.       
```cpp
bool AppWindow::OpenPrintDialog(COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND printDialogKind)
{
     wil::com_ptr<ICoreWebView2_15> webView2_15;
     CHECK_FAILURE(m_webView->QueryInterface(IID_PPV_ARGS(&webView2_15)));
     CHECK_FEATURE_RETURN(webView2_15);
     CHECK_FAILURE(webView2_15->Print(printDialogKind));
     return true;
}
```

```c#
void OpenPrintDialog(object target, ExecutedRoutedEventArgs e)
{
     string printDialog = e.Parameter.ToString();
     if (printDialog == "PrintPreview")
     {
         webView.CoreWebView2.Print(CoreWebView2PrintDialogKind.BrowserPrintPreview);
     }
     else
     {
         webView.CoreWebView2.Print(CoreWebView2PrintDialogKind.SystemPrint);
     }
}
```

## PrintWithSettings

You can use `PrintWithSettings` method to print to a specific printer without a print dialog. You can programatically configure print settings using `CreatePrintSettings2`, and call `PrintWithSettings` to print the current page.

> // This example prints the current page without a print dialog to the `Microsoft Print To PDF` printer with the settings.

Reviewer: Is there a reason why a dev would do all this to print to a pdf versus using our existing CoreWebView2.PrintToPdf method? Maybe we can use a different printer name or take the name as a parameter or something?

    CHECK_FAILURE(printSettings->put_ShouldPrintBackgrounds(true));

    CHECK_FAILURE(
        webView2_15->PrintToPdfStream(
            printSettings.get(),
            Callback<ICoreWebView2PrintToPdfStreamCompletedHandler>(
                [this](HRESULT errorCode, IStream* pdfData) -> HRESULT
                {
                    CHECK_FAILURE(errorCode);
                    AsyncMessageBox(
                        (errorCode == S_OK) ? L"Print to PDF Stream succeeded"
                                   : L"Print to PDF Stream failed",
                        L"Print to PDF Stream");
                    return S_OK;
                })
                .Get()));
     return true;
}
```

```c#
async void PrintToPdfStream()
{
    CoreWebView2PrintSettings printSettings = null;
    printSettings = WebViewEnvironment.CreatePrintSettings2();
    printSettings.Orientation = CoreWebView2PrintOrientation.Portrait;
    printSettings.ShouldPrintBackgrounds = true;

    MemoryStream pdfStream = new MemoryStream();
    System.IO.Stream stream = await webView.CoreWebView2.PrintToPdfStreamAsync(printSettings);

>     MessageBox.Show(this, "Print to PDF Stream succeeded", "Print To PDF Stream");

Author: Added a function `DisplayPdfDataInPrintDialog` to tell the devs that use the stream data in custom print dialog. Not sure we want to put step-by-step process for a custom print preview dialog.

}
```

# API Details

## Win32 C++
``` cpp
/// Specifies the print dialog kind.
[v1_enum] 
typedef enum COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND {
  /// Opens the browser print preview dialog.
  COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND_BROWSER_PRINT_PREVIEW,

  /// Opens the system print dialog.
  COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND_SYSTEM_PRINT,

} COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND;

/// Specifies the printing side.
[v1_enum] 
typedef enum COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE {
  /// Single-sided printing.
  COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE_SINGLE,

  /// Double-sided, horizontal printing.
  COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE_BOTH_HORIZONTAL,

  /// Double-sided, vertical printing.
  COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE_BOTH_VERTICAL,

} COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE;

[uuid(92269C88-1CC1-47E0-9A87-71458409BA15), object, pointer_default(unique)]

> interface ICoreWebView2_15 : IUnknown {

Reviewer: public interfaces should be derived from their parent

```suggestion
interface ICoreWebView2_15 : ICoreWebView2_14 {
```

  /// Print the current page asynchronously to the specified printer with the provided settings.
  /// See `ICoreWebView2PrintSettings2` for description of settings. The handler will return `E_ABORT`
  /// if `printerName` is empty or null or invalid or invalid settings for a given printer.
  /// 
  /// The async `PrintWithSettings` operation completes when it finishes 
  /// printing to the printer. At this time the `ICoreWebView2SPrintWithSettingsCompletedHandler` 
  /// is invoked. Only one `Printing` operation can be in progress at a time. If

>   /// `PrintWithSettings` is called while a `PrintWithSettings` or `PrintToPdf` or `PrintToPDFStream` 

Reviewer: Or Print?

>   /// `PrintWithSettings` is called while a `PrintWithSettings` or `PrintToPdf` or `PrintToPDFStream` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /// `PrintWithSettings` is called while a `PrintWithSettings` or `PrintToPdf` or `PrintToPdfStream` 
```

  /// job is in progress, the completed handler is immediately invoked with an error.
  ///
  /// \snippet AppWindow.cpp PrintWithSettings
  HRESULT PrintWithSettings(
    [in] ICoreWebView2PrintSettings2* printSettings,
    [in] ICoreWebView2PrintWithSettingsCompletedHandler* handler);

  /// Opens the print dialog to print the current page. See `COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND` 
  /// for descriptions of print dialog kinds.
  /// The default value is `COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND_BROWSER_PRINT_PREVIEW`.
  /// 
  /// \snippet AppWindow::OpenPrintDialog

>   HRESULT Print([in] COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_DIALOG_KIND printDialogKind);

Reviewer: Can this too be an async operation that completes when the printing has completed (like PrintWithSettings?)

Author: When print dialog is system print, we don't know whether printing is completed or not. In this case, we don't know when to invoke the completed handler.

                           [in] ICoreWebView2PrintToPdfStreamCompletedHandler* handler);
}

/// Receives the result of the `PrintWithSettings` method.
/// `errorCode` returns S_OK if the PrintWithSettings operation succeeded.
[uuid(4B2FE043-1A1A-4924-803D-C05E5FDCA3B0), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2PrintWithSettingsCompletedHandler : IUnknown {
  /// Provides the result of the corresponding asynchronous method. 
  HRESULT Invoke([in] HRESULT errorCode);
}

/// Receives the result of the `PrintToPdfStream` method.
/// `errorCode` returns S_OK if the PrintToPdfStream operation succeeded.
/// The printable pdf data is returned in the `pdfStream` object.
[uuid(78A9FC37-249B-4E7E-A2E6-20CAAA14AE7B), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2PrintToPdfStreamCompletedHandler : IUnknown {
  /// Provides the result of the corresponding asynchronous method.
  HRESULT Invoke([in] HRESULT errorCode, [in] IStream* pdfStream);
}

/// Settings used by the `PrintWithSettings` method.
[uuid(DA3AD25C-D121-44DC-83DA-BF5E50DBF0DF), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2PrintSettings2 : ICoreWebView2PrintSettings {

>   /// Page range to print, e.g., `1-5, 8, 11-13`. Defaults to empty string,

Author: I didn't find any documentation link for the page ranges. Updated description and examples to the documentation here that matches with browser print dialog page ranges.

  /// 
  /// The caller must free the returned string with `CoTaskMemFree`. See
  /// [API Conventions](/microsoft-edge/webview2/concepts/win32-api-conventions#strings)
  [propget] HRESULT PageRanges([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);

  /// Set the `PageRanges` property.
  [propput] HRESULT PageRanges([in] LPCWSTR value);

  /// Number of pages per sheet. The Default value is 1 and maximum is 16.
  [propget] HRESULT PagesPerSheet([out, retval] INT32* value);

  /// Set the `PagesPerSheet` property. Returns `E_INVALIDARG` if an invalid value is
  /// provided, and the current value is not changed.
  [propput] HRESULT PagesPerSheet([in] INT32 value);

  /// Number of copies to print. The Default value is 1 and maximum 
  /// copies count is 999. 
  /// This value is ignored in PrintToPdfStream method.
  [propget] HRESULT Copies([out, retval] INT32* value);

  /// Set the `Copies` property. Returns `E_INVALIDARG` if an invalid value is provided 
  /// for the specified printer, and the current value is not changed.
  [propput] HRESULT Copies([in] INT32 value);

  /// Collate of the printer. The default value is `FALSE`. 
  /// This value is ignored in PrintToPdfStream method.

>   [propget] HRESULT Collate([out, retval] BOOL* value);

Reviewer: How about `ShouldCollate` instead? Collate sounds like a method name because its named with just the verb.

  /// Set the `Collate` property.
  [propput] HRESULT Collate([in] BOOL value);

>   /// Color of the print. The default value is `TRUE`.

Reviewer: This text makes it sound like the property is picking a color. But it seems like its actually picking if the print should be in color or black and white?

  /// This value is ignored in PrintToPdfStream method.
  [propget] HRESULT QualityHorizontal([out, retval] INT32* value);

  /// Set the `QualityHorizontal` property. If an invalid value is provided 
  /// for the specified printer, `ICoreWebView2PrintWithSettingsCompletedHandler`
  /// handler will return `E_ABORT`.
  [propput] HRESULT QualityHorizontal([in] INT32 value);

  /// The vertical printer resolution for the page, in dots per inch.
  /// This value is ignored in PrintToPdfStream method.
  [propget] HRESULT QualityVertical([out, retval] INT32* value);

  /// Set the `QualityVertical` property. If an invalid value is provided 
  /// for the specified printer, `ICoreWebView2PrintWithSettingsCompletedHandler`
  ///  handler will return `E_ABORT`.
  [propput] HRESULT QualityVertical([in] INT32 value);

  /// The name of the printer to use.
  /// This value is ignored in PrintToPdfStream method.
  ///
  /// The caller must free the returned string with `CoTaskMemFree`.  See
  /// [API Conventions](/microsoft-edge/webview2/concepts/win32-api-conventions#strings)
  [propget] HRESULT PrinterName([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);

>   /// Set the `PrinterName` property. If provided printer is empty or null or invalid,

Author: Oh yes. Updated that if printer name is empty or null, we print to default printer on the OS.

}

/// Receives the result of the `PrintWithSettings` method.
/// `errorCode` returns S_OK if the PrintWithSettings operation succeeded.
[uuid(4B2FE043-1A1A-4924-803D-C05E5FDCA3B0), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2PrintWithSettingsCompletedHandler : IUnknown {
  /// Provides the result of the corresponding asynchronous method.
  HRESULT Invoke([in] HRESULT errorCode);
}

/// Receives the result of the `PrintToPdfStream` method.
/// `errorCode` returns S_OK if the PrintToPdfStream operation succeeded.
/// The printable pdf data is returned in the `pdfStream` object.
[uuid(78A9FC37-249B-4E7E-A2E6-20CAAA14AE7B), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2PrintToPdfStreamCompletedHandler : IUnknown {
  /// Provides the result of the corresponding asynchronous method.
  HRESULT Invoke([in] HRESULT errorCode, [in] IStream* pdfStream);
}

/// Settings used by the `PrintWithSettings` method.
[uuid(DA3AD25C-D121-44DC-83DA-BF5E50DBF0DF), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2PrintSettings2 : ICoreWebView2PrintSettings {
  /// Page range to print. Defaults to empty string, which means print all pages.

>   ///

Author: There isn't official documentation on this valid page ranges when I searched. 

However, I found edge print preview ui [Pages](https://dev.azure.com/microsoft/Edge/_git/chromium.src?path=/chrome/browser/resources/edge_print_preview_react/src/helpers/print-preview-utils.js&version=GBmain&line=94&lineEnd=95&lineStartColumn=1&lineEndColumn=1&lineStyle=plain&_a=contents) validation notes which I copied from, and to use in webview2.

>   /// Print ranges should be separated by commas.

Reviewer: I feel like we're missing some context here. Also the term 'Print ranges' doesn't show up again in this doc. Maybe this is supposed to be Page ranges? Also, something about whitespace (is the following true?)

```suggestion
  /// The PageRanges property is a list of page ranges specifying one or more pages that should be printed separated by commas. Any whitespace between page ranges is ignored.
```

  /// A valid page range has a parsable format and every page identifier is

>   /// greater than 0 unless wildcards are used(see below examples).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /// greater than 0 unless wildcards are used (see below examples). The first page is 1.
```

  ///

>   /// Duplicates are not eliminated.

Author: Removed this part as print service ignores the duplicate page number from the client. Or should we say duplicates page numbers ignored?

  ///
  /// Wildcard the first number must be larger than 0 and less or equal then document total page count.
  /// If it is missed then 1 is used as the first number.

>   /// Wildcard the second number must be larger then the first number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /// The `last page` must be larger than the `start page`.
```

  /// "2"                   |  Yes  | Assuming document total page count >= 2.
  /// "1-4, 9, 3-6, 10, 11" |  Yes  | Assuming document total page count >= 11.
  /// "1-4, -6"             |  Yes  | Assuming document total page count >= 6.
  /// "2-"                  |  Yes  | Assuming document total page count >= 2, means from 2 to the * end.
  /// "4-2, 11, -6"         |  No   |
  ///  "-"                  |  Yes  | Assuming document total page count >= 1.
  ///  "1-4dsf, 11"         |  No   | Regardless of document total page count.
  ///
  /// The caller must free the returned string with `CoTaskMemFree`. See
  /// [API Conventions](/microsoft-edge/webview2/concepts/win32-api-conventions#strings)
  [propget] HRESULT PageRanges([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);

  /// Set the `PageRanges` property.
  [propput] HRESULT PageRanges([in] LPCWSTR value);

  /// Number of pages per sheet. The Default value is 1 and maximum is 16.
  [propget] HRESULT PagesPerSheet([out, retval] INT32* value);

  /// Set the `PagesPerSheet` property. Returns `E_INVALIDARG` if an invalid value is
  /// provided, and the current value is not changed.
  [propput] HRESULT PagesPerSheet([in] INT32 value);

>   /// Number of copies to print. The Default value is 1 and maximum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /// Number of copies to print. The default value is 1 and the maximum
```

>   /// copies count is 999.

Author: Added minimum. This range matches the browser print preview ui dialog.

We return E_INVALIDARG if out of range is used. That is included in the put property documentation.

  /// for the specified printer, and the current value is not changed.
  [propput] HRESULT Copies([in] INT32 value);

  /// True if the printed document should be collated. The default value is `FALSE`.
  /// This value is ignored in PrintToPdfStream method.
  [propget] HRESULT ShouldCollate([out, retval] BOOL* value);

  /// Set the `ShouldCollate` property.
  [propput] HRESULT ShouldCollate([in] BOOL value);

  /// True if the print should be in color, otherwise prints in black and white.
  /// The default value is `TRUE`.
  [propget] HRESULT IsColor([out, retval] BOOL* value);

  /// Set the `IsColor` property.
  [propput] HRESULT IsColor([in] BOOL value);

  /// Printer's duplex settings. See `COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE` for descriptions
  /// of print sides. The default value is `COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE_SINGLE`.
  /// This property is ignored by the PrintToPdf and PrintToPdfStream methods.
  [propget] HRESULT PrintSide([out, retval] COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE* value);

  /// Set the `PrintSide` property.
  [propput] HRESULT PrintSide([in] COREWEBVIEW2_PRINT_SIDE value);

  /// The horizontal printer resolution for the page, in dots per inch.

>   /// The default value is 600.

Author: I didn't find minimum and maximum values for quality to include.

Below are the values I see upon querying printer capabilities (native API) and print preview dialog uses these values to display qualities to the end user.

**File printers: **

Microsoft PDF - Only 600 
OneNote for Desktop - Only 600
XPS - Only 600
OneNotes for Windows - Only 300

**Physical printer: **
Hp printer on my machine - Default is 600 but dpi's it supports are 300/600/1200

**Fax:**
Fax - 200

However, upon manually hard coding dpi's values in our code, printing doesn't throw any error for values I have tested with file printers ( -600, 0, 450, 150).

Removed about invalid values statement here but I am not really sure how to address the qualities since these values varies and we don't know when we create the printSettings.

As printing API doesn't throw any error, should we simply pass the value user has provided without validation? What should be the default value? Here I added 600 but what if end user selects 
Should we provide Quality property in our API?  This not asked by our partner, but I added this to match with the edge print dialog since we are saying this API helps for custom print dialog and not sure any of our GitHub customers would be interested in this. 

Do you have any other suggestions?

>   /// The default value is 600.

Reviewer: At least we can document that the allowed values for Quality vary from printer to printer and that end devs should consult OS printer APIs to determine allowed values?

What happens when you provide the default 600 to OneNote which only allows 300? It would be good to document what happens when an invalid value is provided.

>   /// The default value is 600.

Author: Chromium code prints with the printer default quality if we provide an invalid value. In WebView2, we check provided qualities for the provided printer and run completed handler with an error if it is not in the printer qualities list.

Added the doc accordingly.

        Double MarginBottom { get; set; };
        Double MarginLeft { get; set; };
        Double MarginRight { get; set; };
        Boolean ShouldPrintBackgrounds { get; set; };
        Boolean ShouldPrintSelectionOnly { get; set; };
        Boolean ShouldPrintHeaderAndFooter { get; set; };
        String HeaderTitle { get; set; };
        String FooterUri { get; set; };

        [interface_name("Microsoft.Web.WebView2.Core.ICoreWebView2PrintSettings2")]
        {
            // ICoreWebView2PrintSettings2 members
            String PageRanges { get; set; };
            Int32 PagesPerSheet { get; set; };
            Int32 Copies { get; set; };
            Boolean ShouldCollate { get; set; };
            Boolean IsColor { get; set; };
            CoreWebView2PrintSide PrintSide { get; set; };
            Int32 QualityHorizontal { get; set; };
            Int32 QualityVertical { get; set; };
            String PrinterName { get; set; };
        }
    }

    runtimeclass CoreWebView2
    {
        // ...

        [interface_name("Microsoft.Web.WebView2.Core.ICoreWebView2_15")]
        {
            void Print(CoreWebView2PrintDialogKind printDialogKind);
            void Print();

>             Windows.Foundation.IAsyncAction PrintWithSettings(CoreWebView2PrintSettings printSettings);

Reviewer: Async methods in .NET & WinRT should end with Async
```suggestion
            Windows.Foundation.IAsyncAction PrintWithSettingsAsync(CoreWebView2PrintSettings printSettings);
```
